
## Consciousness

Hegel's ultimate idea of consciousness is fundamentally *idealist*. Let's discuss a basic idea of idealism, sometimes called subjective idealism: there is no real world independent of my existence, instead I construct it, I project it onto my own consciousness, which is therefore in some sense  deluded, unlike I come to the recognition of the fundamental truth of idealism. I – the subject – make the world continuously, and in this view, the moment my consciousness disappears, so too does the world. The world is, in other words, a dream conjured by the very powerful spirit that, even if I don't know it yet, is still me. This is the world of the matrix if you like, or of the simulation. One problem with this view – which Hegel is very attuned to – is that of consciousness itself. Is it "real", or is it like everything else, a projection? But if it is the latter case, then my whole account is incoherent. So some notional "I" must be real, even if nothing else exists. Some of you will recognize the famous articulation of this position:

> Cogito ergo sum (I think therefore I am)


Hegel's idealism is opposed to this, but it shares characteristics. Hegel does not want to contrast consciousness with the world, as though the illusory appearance of objects could be distinguished in an ontological sense from my own specific reality. Consciousness must, for Hegel, be of the same order of things as things that it is conscious of. At the same time, he wants to deny realism – the idea that everything is ultimately real objects, including consciousness, just a series of atoms uniquely arranged to produce the experience we call being conscious. 

No - for Hegel consciousness comes first, it continues to will all things – including itself, into existence. But it encounters a problem of its own: how does it know what is true? Truth is established via the *testing* of things – of parts of the world, against our general and whole sense of the world we carry with us. Failure to measure up to this holistic sense means the part is incorrect, like when I say the sky is green. Or I may need to, more rarely, adjust the sense of the world itself: as for instance when I realize that the earth goes around the sun. This is even true for consciousness itself: its own account of itself, its coming into *self-consciousness*, involves as we saw a testing of itself against another self-consciousness via the process of recognition. And for Hegel, this sense of the whole is something transmitted to us, at once an individual and collective project of *learning*. 

Now I want to make one more bold claim here: that Hegel's quite unique conception of idealism connects with what we learned about machine learning, and in particular the attention mechanism. This 'everything-is-connected-to-everything-else' idea is another way of saying, perhaps, that the Hegelian picture of consciousness just is this process of each of our concepts paying attention to every other concept. Endlessly recalibrating themselves until the conceptual scheme we form is consistent with our experience of the world. In this (admittedly speculative and radical view) the progress of world history towards Absolute Knowledge which Hegel documents might be something like a language model that continuously updates itself to the point of perfection.

So in this view, AI is already on a path towards consciousness and self-consciousness - perhaps a different, though necessarily related, version of consciousness than the one we as humans can subscribe to. The relatedness or similarity would at least consist in this: that the attention mechanism involves an endless contextualization of terms by other terms, arriving at greater and greater predictive power for what must come next: the next token, pixel, chemical compound or whatever.


### The Unconscious

The text I've chosen from Freud is a deceptively simple one. Freud is of course known as the great theorist or philosopher of the Unconscious: a concept that has always existed in both psychology and mythology, as a part of the mind that is in some sense unaccountable to itself. There are several parts of his presentation we might want to focus on here for our own interests.

First, Freud argues that it is the nature of the Unconscious that even when it appears as something for consciousness, it may not appear as it actually is. He invokes the Kantian distinction between phenomenon and noumenon in support of this - a distinction we know Hegel was himself suspicious of. 

Freud's contribution here is not the identification of unconscious psychic or cognitive processes. It is instead the construction of a system. This system involves both a part that is conscious and another that is unconscious. It also includes what he terms a "censor". Curiously, Freud uses language that reminds us of political censorship: this internal censor works to regulate what is and isn't admitted to consciousness. It prevents, in other words, our internal monologue from being "free speech". This censor admits thoughts to enter what Freud terms a "foreconscious" or "preconscious" - a kind of purgatory for those thoughts, on their passage from an unconscious hell to conscious heaven – "until circumstances secure its entrance into consciousness proper". 

But the censor doesn't only block or admit thoughts; it can also transform them or add new things to them. He gives an interesting example: the emotion of anxiety. When we are anxious, Freud suggests, we often seek to locate the cause. And sometimes the cause is obvious to us: an upcoming exam for example. But sometimes it is not. Freud argues here that this can be because the censor blocks a particular "element" emenating from the Unconscious. When that happens, there is still an "energy" attached to that element that requires expression or release. So the element is repressed by the censor, but the energy attached to it is converted into another element: the symptom, a sense of anxiety that cannot locate its precise cause, without psychoanalytic intervention:

> How far the unconscious can be influenced by consciousness has not as yet been determined. Upon the possibility that another person can influence consciousness and thus reach the unconscious the psychoanalytic treatment is based. It may, however, be assumed that the spontaneous influencing of the unconscious from consciousness would be a long and difficult process, if it were possible at all. 

Freud concludes this short essay with reflections upon different psychological conditions: dementia schizophrenia, narcissism. Under these conditions the connections between words and the things they represent becomes lost. What remains is an introspective state where words are repeated without apparent reference to the world - indicating instead they refer to objects that have symbolic meaning in the unconscious, just as dreams do. 


He acknowledges also that, at least for his time, it isn't possible to find the neurological mechansisms responsible for these parts.  