# Nsf Grant With Xinran

Today's learners need to learn the art of interdisciplinary collaboration. Many pressing challenges are too complex to be addressed by any single discipline. These so-called “wicked problems” require synthesis of information across scientific, political, economic, and cultural domains (Jordan et al., 2014). Despite wide acknowledgement of the value of interdisciplinary collaboration, in practice this means different things to different people. A key challenge is ensuring subject matter experts "speak the same language". Failure to communicate can cause projects to fail and mislead.

Trained on data from all fields of human knowledge, AI can help with the task of knowledge brokering across fields. Yet AI introduces trust issues of its own. Does it accurate represent state-of-the-art knowledge in a given field? Is it a reliable translator of that knowledge to outsiders? Some fields, moreover, may lack consensus about what reliability even means. 


This project proposed an approach to what we term the problem of "knowledge grounding". State-of-the-art generative AI systems show remarkable "metacognitive" abilities to reflect upon the nature of the information they provide - including the reliability of this information. However there is no standardized way to inform newcomers to a disciplinary field about how a given AI system rates its own information. This "meta" knowledge requires, typically, follow-up prompting strategies. Our approach will develop an ontology for representing the *epistemic* state of information in a systematic way. 

The purpose of this approach is not to reinvent the wheel of fine-turning LLMs for accuracy. Rather it is ensure LLMs can *report* on their perceived accuracy in a reliable way. 

A further essential feature to this approach is to allow subject matter experts to qualify a LLM's self-reported status - to indicate, for example, that the consensus about a given claim to knowledge is much less than that reported. This involves maintaining a separate ontology about such claims that the LLMs consults and, if necessary, uses to override its default information. 

Our AI knowledge broker  aims then to translate information across fields in a way that both communicates essential ideas and facts, and relates how those ideas and facts are regarded in the discipline itself. Using an ontology allows for an LLM's own reasoning to be supplemented by separate deductive reasoning, using for example Descriptive Logic-based inferences where this might strengthen probabilistic inference. This hybrid system represents an example of neuro-symbolic reasoning, which is appropriate in contexts where the probabilistic nature of generative AI needs to be augmented by deterministic and non-stochastic reasoning.

To illustrate this, we use the example of an urban planning problem: how should a new residential complex be designed? This can be a 'wicked' issue, as it must balance cost, market trends, local planning by-laws, availability of materials and labor, aesthetic considerations and social factors (e.g. what neighbours think). Moreover the language used to describe, for example, government regulations can be difficult for outsiders. Management of this project would involve different skills and expertise, consulted often at different times. Our proposed system would be able to take in different sources and perspectives, and translate the language into easy-to-understand language. But it would also report on its own confidence in its claims, using a classificatory schema we devise for this purpose. The schema will employ an extended variation of Bloom's taxonomy [or equivalent], which captures the stage of understanding and degree of understanding in a claim. Both claims and confidence would be captured by our project ontology, which represents a live 'knowledge base' the LLM (and human stakeholders) can continue to consult and advise. As the system evolves, human participants will have stronger and more in-depth guidance about the key constraints and options, explainable in ways all stakeholders can understand and use in decision-making.

The project will then administer the system to three interdisciplinary collaboration projects at UIUC. A key component of this work will be to understand how our approach contributes to individual and group *knowledge synthesis* [move onto that section]...


